
## Sept 20th, Wednesday

QGIS may be a good solution to visualize data better, mainly with the Python plugin - thanks to Katie!

It was a question last meeting that the trajectory looked like it was tapering off, even going down with mature forest age, given mean value for the area.

In this case, we have many less points and the trajectory is more expected, almost linear - there is a difference between the sites.

### Meeting
- ask Brian about Panama courses. Should I be applying for funds?
- What regions may cause more systematic bias. (contact remsens ppl)
- See if the variation within patch corresponds with error rates.
- Fallow periods could be correlated with error rates or bias?
- Sparse matrices can be easier to handle. It's the structure that you want in R.
- Where do the biases matter? Where do the biases cause weighting to cause problems?
- Could very high variance cause to eliminate patches with very low or very high weight?



## Sept 19th, Tuesday
De manhã, eu fui terminar um pouco mais do meu currículo.

É bem desconfortável olhar pra trás e ver tudo que eu podia ter feito e não fiz, porque eu não sabia como me administrar. Mas acontece, foi um período complicado de aprendizado. Agora eu já tenho tudo e posso priorizar melhor. A prioridade agora é terminar tudo que eu tenho em aberto, publicar, e seguir adiante. Aprendi, experimentei, e já sei o que é o meu caminho e o que eu vou seguir.

Começando por boas estratégias de organização do meu código do R, e vamos incorporar dados de grande escala. No fim de semana, eu quero organizar o meu código de Python e reaprender a escrever Python com o projeto da faculdade e com Google Earth Engine.

### End of the day

De novo, parece que o dia flui e eu ainda não consegui parar quieta com o meu código e os meus dados. Consegui organizar mais os scripts e tenho melhor noção do que fazer, mas preciso separar o trabalho de pesquisa dos outros (leitura, estudo, escrita). Quantificar o tempo que eu passo com cada um é uma boa ideia.

Read a bit about ESA GlobBiomass and have a better idea on how it works. Now I want to see how to implement inverse variance to the biomass value and the model.



## Sept 18th, Monday

Finished writing the main parts. Chat GPT is very helpful to find better ways of phrasing things, but the abstract needs a lot of work. To finish FRQNT I need to cite and finish my CV, which I can always do after the meeting with the lab.

For today, I will:
- get the abstract in good shape
- I will get ESA GlobBiomass and GEDI and get plotting.
### Lab meeting
What different sources of error can come in?
- How was error measured? This can affect consequences of the error on the result.
	- Would selective logging lead to errors in biomass?
- Run the model at every step and see what happens.
Think how 100m biomass values would relate to the land use values - do we have mean biomass per 100m?
---------------
### Braindump

Considering the possibility of joining Scientista mentorship. I know that Max Jousse is also organizing mentorship events with QLS that happen every last Monday of the month, but that I can't attend because of lab meeting. Scientista mentorship is due this saturday so I have time to think before signing up.

[Mentors - Scientista McGill Mentorship Program Application 2023-2024 (google.com)](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdZNdDAxqK2jWwEm73DOD5lFjiYpqrjtD8w-X6cSvlaNkZj1g/viewform)

Messaged Marcelo to ask about potential in Brazil.

Would be nice to have results by late October to share in Fiona's lab.

---------------
### End of the day

FRQNT finished, but I need to code tomorrow no matter what.

## Sept 17th, Sunday

Finished up more of setting up Obsidian, spent most of the day with Hossein's family. Must finish writing and coding - will do that today, tomorrow and Tuesday. Must prioritize. It's okay - meetings will happen and progress is being made. One day at a time.

## Sept 16th, Saturday
Housework, talking to family.
Basic maintenance of saved information, organization.
There are many things I'd like to do - gotta go one at a time, and prioritize.
- Finishing FRQNT application
- Organizing code
Thinking whether I can use some of what I'm studying - agriculture in latin america, nutrient dynamics - to write scicomm articles.
Consider The Conversation?

Spent some time getting things done for family and getting better acquainted to the Obsidian system. It's okay, I will use it on a daily basis going forward.

Reassessing weekly goals based on meeting with Andrew.

## Sept 15th, Friday
Foi um dia de reuniões interessantes.
### Meeting with Andrew
statistical rethinking - book recommended
Remember the difference between error of real data and standard deviation of expected values.
with the size of the error bars, we can weigh their effect on the final AGB estimate.
### Meeting with Martín Giraldo
Had an interesting conversation about potential of agroforestry in Latin America - began the [[310 Latin American Agriculture]] page to write down notes on the topic going forward.

Also, some progress was made with FRQNT application.
## Sept 14th, Thursday

Ran a bunch of errands - at the end of the day I got some writing done for FRQNT.
## Weekly goals

- [ ] incorporate error from [[GEDI]] and [[ESA CCI Biomass]].
	- With the size of the error bars, we can weigh their effect on the final AGB estimate.

- [ ] Incorporate data from the rest of the forest - not just a small region
	- Do the same for the forest age
	- Check if there's differences in the relationship across the biome.

- [ ] Incorporate new branch on GitHub to test changes

- [ ] Investigate all other predictors:
	- soil
	- CWD (check regionality/magnitude)
	- Mature forest cover
	- AET

Keep in mind:
- Always to ask questions from readings
- Always to verify how much data was removed, and how does its distribution look like - including the distribution of the removed data.

## Weekend menu

[x] look into BIOS2 courses
[x] Check up on Javier/Jacob contact
	added on to do when looking at remote sensing
[x] Using Obsidian Dataview:
	[How to use the Obsidian Dataview plugin - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTObSymEvWA)
[x] Check how to add authors as tags
	no need - can just make dataview list with desired author for folder ""
[x] Linking bookmarks to obsidian - say, can I add links from papers to the statistical methods I describe in my book?
	done
[x] try to introduce highlights into obsidian as different text colors, not highlight indices
