This week I would like to plan what I will do day by day.

I have:

Wednesday
- plan week
- get cwd and aet properly  
Thursday
- run a few versions of the model and send it to Brian.

Monday August 14th

I am finding really positive outcomes of Vyvanse with OTC anxiety meds. Still, it was hard over the past week as on thursday I had my ADHD consultation, on friday-sat-sun was the rock festival, and now, well, it's monday.
I can still focus and get a small task done and move on though.

It's been tough to get over the TerraClimate issue. I don't understand how earthengine works well enough. The best thing to do now is to investigate ways to access this data.

What's wrong with the downloaded data as it is?
- nothing, as far as the AET data is concerned. So I don't think it has anything to do with what's being downloaded.

Wednesday August 16th

I'd like to start my FRQNT application this coming week.
It's okay to be kind to myself about my lack of progress - I'm doing my best and I'm getting better every day. The medication will definitely help a lot.

Last week I intended to plan everything but with Metallica weekend, Hossein's birthday, and my ADHD stuff, QLS event, plus the credit card payment, it got tough to take the proper time to work. Too many things at once, we gotta realize the limits.

It's okay, this week we're expecting peace and quiet.

I've regained my ground regarding my work. I can add the things to the model and run it, and I know how to work the code to finish everything up and get the data exploration part flowing nicely with Brian and Fiona.

I wanna schedule a meeting with Fiona to talk about transpiration and water stress and seasonality. Try for friday.