Correlation is not causation – collider bias


Collider bias is a distortion that modifies an association between an exposure and outcome, caused by attempts to control for a common effect of the exposure and outcome. It occurs when an exposure and an outcome independently cause a third variable, that variable is termed a ‘collider’. Inappropriately controlling for a collider variable, by study design or statistical analysis, results in collider bias. Controlling for a collider can induce a distorted association between the exposure and outcome, when in fact none exists. [This bias predominantly occurs in observational studies](https://catalogofbias.org/biases/collider-bias/)[1](https://catalogofbias.org/biases/collider-bias/).

An example of collider bias was provided by Sackett in his 1979 paper. He analyzed data from 257 hospitalized individuals and detected an association between locomotor disease and respiratory disease (odds ratio 4.06). The association seemed plausible at the time – locomotor disease could lead to inactivity, which could cause respiratory disease. But Sackett repeated the analysis in a sample of 2783 individuals from the general population and found no association (odds ratio 1.06). The original analysis of hospitalized individuals was biased because both diseases caused individuals to be hospitalized. By looking only within the stratum of hospitalized individuals, Sackett had observed a distorted association. [In contrast, in the general population (including a mix of hospitalized and non-hospitalized individuals) locomotor disease and respiratory disease are not associated](https://catalogofbias.org/biases/collider-bias/)[1](https://catalogofbias.org/biases/collider-bias/).

