---
tags:
---
<< [[2023-12-09 Sat]] | [[2023-12-11 Mon]]>>
[[2023-W49]]

## Daily report


### Make it so


I remember my mother's old fool's gold, one among many treasures collected through a wealth of experiences and adventure. She would tell me that there was real gold inside that rock, but it was impossible to extract, so while the rock was still beautiful, it was also worthless. I would look at the tiny golden sparkles embedded in the grey stone, and it absolutely did not feel worthless to me. Its lost potential was saddening, and I mourned how the precious mineral that could have been worked by an artist into a beautiful piece of jewelry would be forever locked in this stone, mostly hidden from the world, barely shining.

Turns out, fool's gold is not gold at all, but pyrite - iron and sulphur, together making a mineral not as useful as iron, or as beautiful as gold, and indeed, worthless. It is not the stone's fault - there was never a potential there to create art or beauty. The stone lost much of its appeal to me.

I am fool's gold - but which one? Do I have wealth inside me, perfectly necklaceable, held back by unsurmountable walls - of fear, of overwhelm, of post-modern-patriarchal-imperialist-exploitative-capitalism, of feeling-too-much-for-a-world-that-kills-lovers-of-science-and-art? If so, can I PLEASE find out if there is an acid that could corrode the stone, a tool sharp enough to break through the rock? I am clawing at the rock so hard, it hurts, but I would gladly chip away parts of myself if that means what is left can become an item worthy of adorning the beautiful collection of Queen Science and Art, Truth and Beauty.

Or maybe I am pyrite. Maybe a fool would believe my golden sparkles to be sign that there's something precious underneath, when there's truly nothing even the best goldsmith could make use of. In which case, I would have to satisfy myself with, well, being a rock. Doing normal rock things - being in a mountain, or on a dusty shelf in a curious woman's house. Not so glorious, and not so bad.


