---
tags:
---
<< [[2024-01-11 Thu]] | [[2024-01-13 Sat]]>>
[[2024-W02]]

## Crane day

The crane is 50m long, 60m tall. There was a lot of illumination on the top of the canopy, and the ground looked very dark when seen from the top, although the trails look well lit when you're walking through them - gives a good perspective on the light gradient and competition.
==I wonder what is the increase gain in information with an increase in resolution in SAR and LiDAR-measured plots,== and when does the increase in resolution reach a moment that it is just too much. Say, 2cm is useless information! Where in between 100m and 2cm is optimal biomass resolution? I'd guess somewhere around 30-60m, as a large tree crown seems to easily be 15m wide.

Top-down or bottom-up dominance - evolutionary ecologists need information from community ecologists to understand what currently goes on (where are herbivores more diverse, and how does that vary in relation with producer diversity?) to then extrapolate into the past.
==I wonder what theoretical models have been done about this.== 

Bryophyte biodiversity with Mikol - it was a bit annoying to feel like I was being treated like a high schooler in the beginning, but once he understood I already knew basic plant taxonomy it was AWESOME. Got to see liverwort and red algae in a pond full of tadpoles. Held frog eggs on my hand, they look like foam but from up close are tiny tiny eggs.

Katie asked Mikol about the most threatened forest in Panama, and he said it is the dry forest as people don't recognize it as a real forest. I have a feeling this is a local phenomenon, as wet forests in South America, Africa and SE Asia are definitely very threatened. Which forests are more threatened, dry or wet?
- the Cerrado deforestation has risen by 40% while Amazon deforestation has decreased by 50% over the past year
- I WAS WRONG! Dry tropical forests are more threatened! To check whether that is a result of disturbance or deforestation.
- [Tropical Dry Forests The Most Endangered Major Tropical Ecosystem - Biodiversity - NCBI Bookshelf](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK219281/#:~:text=The%20rain%20forest%20is%20not,dry%20forests%20hold%20this%20honor.)


### Panamanian history

Panamanian have pride in their fighting spirit.

**Watermelon slice incident** - one american "bought" a watermelon slice from a panamanian but did not want to pay. a huge fight started and 16 people died.

**Jan 9th is Panama Martyr Day** - around 1964 40-60 students died bringing the Panamanian flag to be hasteada in the Panama Canal area, after the US disrespected an agreement to put both flags in the area. This made the government of Panama more determined to get the canal area back from the US.
The flag was taken and ripped in half. It was reconstructed and is now in a museum. There is a monument to them under the name of the red cross volunteer that was one of the leaders of the monument.
 
In 1979 the Carter treaty promised to give the Zone back to Panama. Was signed by General Turrizo, who actually had consideration for the people's well being. Panama progressed after independence from the US, as there was less leeching from the americans.

Dec 18 1989 - US military wanted to kill a panamanian general and bombed and destroyed the whole Canal zone. This was due to a part of the CIA wanting to allow drug dealing to reach the US in their efforts to emprison and enslave poor people as prison workers for crack cocaine consumption.

The president that signed the treaty with the US for independence from Colombia did not know English well, so there is a chance he did not understand he was giving away a critical part of his country. Americans lived as kings in Panamanian soil while the locals starved. With the killing of Panamanians in the 80s, people still resent the US.



