---
tags:
---
<< [[2023-10-29 Sun]] | [[2023-10-31 Tue]]>>
[[2023-W44]]

## Daily report

Prepared talk and sent emails - finished the organization that needed to be done after a long while of being sick.

Did no actual research, but did other things that I needed to do (protest for tuition hike, emails, logistics, organization) and should be ready to focus on work tomorrow.

- low values had often high biomass. why would high variances be more common across low values?
- how does SD and variance correlate with biomass? can you describe with a relationship?
- chapter 2 - agriculture in panama answering a problem? can I use this?
- should I find someone who knows SAR to teach me about the SD and the polarization in return?

- health of surrounding mature forest could be another factor on indigenous land making a difference 
- does using land use improve predictions?
- 
## Make it so
```tasks
due before tomorrow
not done
short view
```

## Self

Talked to MC for a bit - that's also a friendship I'd like to invest on.

I believe I went on too much of a tangent with the planning to go to Brazil, INPA and potentially USP. In the end I don't want to be at USP, I want to be at INPA, so that is what I should go for.
Já vai ser difícil voltar, ficar sem o Hossein. E eu vou voltar pra onde eu não quero estar? Faz muito mais sentido eu finalmente escolher o lugar que eu quero ir e passar a minha vida no instituto que eu quero passar. Não preciso morar em São Paulo, ficar infeliz e frustrada, e render menos. Pelo menos no INPA eu vou estar com pessoas que tem mais a ver comigo e em um ambiente que eu quis. Manaus é cheia de minions, mas São Paulo também é um antro... O Brasil tem dessas coisas. Querer evitar poluição do ar em Manaus e ir pra São Paulo chega a ser irônico. Não vou me distrair muito com a USP mas vou aos poucos conhecer o contexto cientifico do país.