---
tags:
---
<< [[2024-01-16 Tue]] | [[2024-01-18 Thu]]>>
[[2024-W03]]

## Project Day

### New interests

**Human Geography** -> A whole research field examining the relationships between people and their environment. Addresses exactly my intended expansion from ecology. Working more on this would also allow me the opportunity to explore my desire to work on communication (not only journalists get to talk to people for their jobs!).
 
> "Ecologia sem luta de classes é jardinagem" - Chico Mendes

**Coral Reef Ecology** -> The overlap between community ecology and species coexistence in coral reefs and forests is super interesting, which would be a cool avenue to explore my interest in marine biology. Also, the effects of deforestation on marine ecosystems through river flow is interesting, as well as aquaculture and fishing. Maybe I don't need to be restricted to terrestrial ecology.

I am rethinking my role as a scientist. I planned on being a modeller working on young forests, but I may see myself more as a landscape ecologist working on human-environment interactions, degradation and restoration, in the tropics, across ecosystems, using both quantitative and qualitative methods, primarily as a quantitative ecologist collaborating with social scientists, and dabbing into social science (primarily environmental policy and human geography) as much as I can.

### Project Ideas

#### Fellowship Proposal
Good opportunity to investigate the old interest of Javier Sanchez-Galán and myself into the relationship between forest degradation and human nutrition. Depending on the cost, could investigate how does human nutrition quality change depending on whether a community is surrounded by healthy old growth, disturbed old growth, new growth, or fully modified landscapes.

#### Ipeti Report
I am curious about how much the Emberá people still rely on the forest for their livelihoods. How does forest degradation or protection affect them?

MC mentioned how there are conflicting views - they realize that cattle farming will damage their ability to grow medicinal herbs, but they need the cattle to subsist today, and have little option. In the end, the short-term benefits outweigh the long-term benefits.

**Tragedy of the commons** -> the idea that once a good becomes common, it is more prone to exploitation because short-term individual benefits outweigh long-term collective benefits. [Has been contested by Elinor Ostrom.](https://www.aei.org/articles/elinor-ostrom-and-the-solution-to-the-tragedy-of-the-commons/)

#### Course Final Project

- comparacion dentre relacion de comunidades agroforestales y comunidades aquaculturales, o ganaderia y pescado. como la gente vive de la tierra y el bosque y la gente que vive del mar, las diferencias y similaridades
- que come la gente en areas de degradacion diferente. como cambio de uso de tierra cambia la diversidad alimentaria y salud de dieta
- comunicación y educación y su impacto en relación a cuestiones que envuelvan livelihoods - la gente mata al jaguar por ignorancia y necesidad

MC mentioned I should talk to representatives of the communities rather than the people themselves, to get a broad sample of many communities and different perspectives with less conversations and interviews. This can be community leaders, scientists, company heads.

##### People with overlapping interests:

**Dineilys**
- ganado y agua y uso de tierra
- educacion y corales
	- coral bleaching y el niño
	- edad aproximada de los corales ya estabelecidos
- diferencias de comunidades en copa de arbol y understory (murcielagos)
- como el reconocimiento de los murcielagos que están polinizando la parte de arriba y que se sabe de su historia natural.
- relacion del nutriente del suelo y los arboles

**Cristina**
- migrantes y danos ambientales
- credito de carbono y livelihoods

**Analida**
- climate change y climate action

**Katie**
- opinión de la gente en relación a la naturaleza