---
tags:
---
<< [[2024-01-14 Sun]] | [[2024-01-16 Tue]]>>
[[2024-W03]]

## Huerta reef snorkeling

We worked on coral identification, benthic relief, and  used interesting methods to randomize sampling.

Coral ID was done by dropping a 1m long bar with 5 markings on it. The bar was to be dropped randomly in a zig zag pattern around the reef. Corals touched by the bar to be IDd.

Benthic relief was measured with a chain of known length that was dropped on the reef, and then beginning to end was measured. Enough to get a rough measure of terrain roughness (ha ha)

Also, to measure cover, we put a square on the reef to see the percent cover of different types (algae, CCA, dead coral, living coral, sponges). Overall ineffective, but made much better by the use of AI!

They use [TagLab: A CNN based image segmentation tool oriented to marine data analysis](https://github.com/cnr-isti-vclab/TagLab/tree/main). My immediate reaction was that there MUST be a Python package for this because there is no way I am learning to use GUI for a specific tool unnecessarily. However, a lot of the data cleaning is done manually (segmentation done by the algorithm needs to be fixed), not unlike collecting training data for land use classification. At some point, there is always some sort of manual data collection happening; nothing can be 100% automatized!

## Coral Reefs

<mark> I am curious about the Amazon delta reef system </mark>, and how it is affected by the forest. Also, the freshwater barrier opens a possibility for an interesting study on a marine barrier, and the sister species Sotalia guianensis and fluvialis and how they evolved across a salinity gradient.
### Coral reproduction

**Coral spawning is timed abased on light spectra cues given by the full moon and the sunset.** Once the full moon is up, and the setting sun is at the expected angle for each specific species, they spawn within 15 minutes of each other. Studies have been done to shade coral during spawning time, showing they needed the correct lighting cues.
Main method of reproductive isolation is timing. When timing overlaps, they develop other methods to inviabilize fertilization.
Some coral species produce sperm and eggs at the same time. Other species will have each colony release only eggs or only sperm.
Corals can be **spawners** or **brooders**. Spawners need to time perfectly the release of eggs and sperm so there can be fertilization in the water, while brooders release already fertilized larvae.

#### Settlement
Corals settle in CCA (crustose coralline algae), calcareous red algae that are essential for reef cementation.

Two individual larvae of the same cohort, after they settle at the same time in very close spots, can fuse and become a chimera. About 5% are chimeras.

Conspecific negative density-dependence: Do corals also tend to settle far away from their parent, like trees?
- Few ongoing studies! Unsure if corals tend to avoid their own species rather than other species (heterospecific negative density-dependence).
- On healthy reefs, monospecific stands are rare.

<mark>How do strategies differ between shallow and deep water corals?</mark>

<mark>How does remote sensing of coral reefs work, from space and from water-surface drones?</mark>

Corals seem understudied! I guess I was wrong to assume that the field is oversaturated.

## Personal reflections

Doing science in Latin America is reminding me of the possibilities I've missed out on by being in North America. I am truly grateful for the opportunities I've had, and I recognize my open doors are the result of lots of hard work by myself and many others and even more luck, but at the same time it is painful that to be this privileged, I had to leave Brazil, and that people like me became biologists in a place where the profession is undervalued, with a president who destroys all that has to do with conservation and science.