---
tags: null
dg-publish: true
---
<< [[2024-01-10 Wed]] | [[2024-01-12 Fri]]>>
[[2024-W02]]

## Daviken Daniel day

Daviken spoke about decolonizing science - mentioned the book that Holly had mentioned before as well, [[Decolonizing Methodology]] by [[Linda Thuhui Smith]]. We mentioned the dialogue that must happen between indigenous communities and scientists, which has historically been a dismissal of the indigenous as scientists occupy their land as if it's empty (violating territorial sovereignty). The conversation was geared much towards the relationship between the researcher and the people at the targeted communities. I feel like there is space for more discussions on the role of scientists as active agents - activists - on the issues that these communities face.

Daniel was speaking as a leader of an NGO that works with social-environmental issues in Panama, ranging from gender issues to indigenous territorial sovereignty. He is a biologist, so also a scientist, but he is very involved with social work now, which is interesting. Over dinner he spoke as if he was almost less a biologist because of it? It's a sentiment I can understand, but it's interesting to see the gradients that exist between the social and biological sciences and how they overlap in different ways, and how a biologist can be so successfully involved with communities while still addressing conservation. He mentioned how some of the malnutrition that happens in Ngobe Bugle region is due to them being displaced from their ancestral land by the spaniards and having to find refuge in poorer areas which are naturally not forested. So, land sovereignty is also an issue of food security - I assume the peoples who are able to maintain their ancestral lands (which tend to be richer) and keep it undisturbed have less nourishment issues. Also connects to the Yanomami that starved after the garimpeiros arrived. Also, we talked how introduction of processed foods and refined sugars is an issue everywhere and brings addiction (like alcohol) and diabetes.
Also, we talked about respecting people's right to choose what happens through their land, campesinos and indigenous alike. We mentioned how protecting the nature is a matter of social equality. Panama is incredibly socially unequal, with an income index skewed high due to the large social gaps. This also makes medications so incredibly expensive here that people bring medications from neighboring countries and even from the US. Whenever there is poverty, nature is the first to suffer. Also reminds of the conversation with Gabriel, on the campesinos that killed the harpia and the jaguar for killing chickens. People don't have the same respect for the environment when they don't understand its value and they have food insecurity. Their work with education is likely as important as their work with agroforestry. They are also involved with Jeff Hall's reforestation project. Also, there was a lot of talk of the mining activities of gold and copper and how many of them have thankfully been closed. They were right in the middle of the mesoamerican corridor, which is also a very awesome thing, an agreement across Central american countries to assure a wildlife corridor.

I would like to incorporate a mix of both Daviken's and Daniel's talks today. Still approach my work from a researcher's lens, with the people I'm working with as aware consenting parts of the project, and also as a part of the community myself, within Brazil and LatAm, to think of how I can help support people in my region.
My project proposal will definitely be more on this end of the thing.
 



