---
tags:
---
<< [[2024-01-06 Sat]] | [[2024-01-08 Mon]]>>
[[2024-W01]]

## Daily report

Helene Muller Landau

[[How do mature forests keep on sequestering carbon after they've reached peak community]]

STRI research beyond Panama - inter-Neotropical studies?

Asian and African tropical forests have larger trees and also larger biomass per plot even after accounting for soil and climate. that is due to mycorrhizal associations and species composition

Mascaro et al 2011 - biomass from LiDAR derived from stem position as well as canopy area
1 hectare scale map of BCI

Avitable et al 2016 - biomass map

1 hectare in a million is sampled!

How are physics-based like in comparison with phenomenological models?

## Old growth forests

Aboveground Woody Productivity
Woody Residence Time

Aboveground woody biomass

Tropical forests have low mortality rates, most species are rare, large trees are rare.
Mortality rates vary with size and species.
Also, there's a large gap in between census years which can make it difficult to understand what caused mortality.

ForestGeo only has plots near Manaus in the Brazilian Amazon. No plot in the Brazilian Amazon is measured in a yearly basis.

Fine-scale tree mortality can be identified with drones. Strong decrease in canopy height will detect dead trees. Araujo et al 2021

More mortality with extreme rainfall events.

Disturbance rates changed with topography, soil type, and forest age.

In the future, the hope is to detect tree mortality better from space, which is also hard because the mortality events are small and short-lived.

## Interspecific variation

High diversity makes tropical forests more resistant to pests.

Species composition depends on habitats.

Hyperspectral imaging can help identify species composition!
- one of the challenges is intraespecific variation
- also high-liana crowns can make it hard to distinguish!

Flowering tabebuia and jacaranda can help identify species!
Phenology includes flowering, fruiting, deciduousness

Cavalieri 2015 - carbon uptake models for the tropics

ForestGeo network is a good community for collaborating on forest research across the tropics.
- there are trading off benefits between focusing on one forest - because of the differences between them - and focusing on the whole landscape.
- datasets are individually controlled at the site level. most sites are getting their own funding.

Nitrous Oxide and high lightning rates are both related to shipping lanes.

Biodiversity loss in islands tend to be in small, isolated islands. Large islands are usually more okay.


### Make it so



