---
tags:
---
<< [[2024-01-15 Mon]] | [[2024-01-17 Wed]]>>
[[2024-W03]]

## 16/01/2024 - Agua Salud

### Hydrology
It was interesting that he began talking about forest sponge effect rather than carbon uptake, biodiversity, and other ecosystem services.

The Panama Canal is an obvious reason - there has been concern over planting trees that soak up water during rainy season and release it during dry to keep levels of the gatun lake.
After the 2016 expansion, there has been more shutdowns because more water is needed and there are issues with pastureland around. He did some calculations that showed that if the whole basin had been cleared and made pasture, the gatun lake dam would have broken during the rainy season, which would have been a disaster for the canal.

<mark>I wonder why he said forests are not as efficient a solution for water management, and that they should be conserved for wood value and biodiversity instead.</mark>

Forests in Panama have different influences on rainfall as Amazon does, evidently because of the size of the isthmus (a short drive of less than two hours and you go ocean to ocean!). The water that is transpired in the forest rains in the Pacific most often.

70% of trees planted in Panama are teak. It has good commercial value.

Storm chasers go measure the flow of water on storms and how that's different depending on the ecosystem.

### Forest Ecology
- African tropical forests are more dominated by a single species.
- It is harder to do research in Africa than here. Jeff has worked in central Africa for 20 years and has felt a large gap between tool availability there and here.
- Political instability is an issue to establish long term plots in tropical areas.
- My model does not incorporate the time between abandonment and regrowth, truly. Only the time when the satellite can identify regrowth, and anything before that is still considered pasture. Looking at this distinction in Agua Salud could be interesting, and using it to validate my model at least for pasture sites.

**Soil fertility** -> Another reason of researching in poor soils, besides the Amazonian conditions, is that richer soils will likely be destined to cropping and the poorer soils will be allowed to regrow.

### Major takeaways

It seems like there is good room for collaboration here. Agua Salud has a similar plot in the tropical dry forest on the other side of the country, and he is doing interesting long term studies with economic viability, as well as the effect of the understory, and passive vs active reforestation, from a pure as well as applied science perspective.

Jeff brought up how wars and conflict are a consequence of environmental collapse. Scientists studying Rwandan resource management predicted the genocide based on when the situation would become critical. With the upcoming climate crisis, things are likely to become worse.