
>[!summary] Summary
> 

## Authors:
[[Vitousek, PeterM.]], [[Howarth, RobertW.]]

## Notes
<p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">we briefly review evidence for nitrogen limitation in a range of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. We then examine a number of mechanisms that could explain the persistence of apparent or real nitrogen limitation in the face of the rather persuasive logic that it should be ephemeral or rare.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Howarth (1988) identified three processes as being potentially nutrient limited: - the growth of populations currently present, - net primary production (NPP, defined as gross production or photosynthesis minus respiration of the producers), and - net ecosystem production (NEP, defined as NPP minus heterotrophic respiration).</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">We are concerned with why it may take millions of years for phosphorus limitation to be expressed - and with why nitrogen often appears to limit production in soils that are “only” tens to hundreds of thousands of years old.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen is often considered to be the element most often limiting to net primary production in terrestrial ecosystems</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> Limitation by phosphorus and other elements also occurs, sometimes jointly with nitrogen limitation and sometimes on relatively unusual soils (ie deep glacial outwash, organic soils). In water-limited systems such as short-grass steppe and desert, water often represents the primary limit to production, but nitrogen is often the nutrient that becomes limiting when water supply is enhanced</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Production in many tropical savamrahs and grasslands is demonstrably nitrogen-limited (van Breman & de Wit 1983; Hogberg 1989) but there is relatively little direct evidence bearing on nutrient limitation in natural tropical forests. Cuevas & Medina (1988) did demostrate that tree roots in a lowland tropical forest on an oxisol proliferated vigorously in response to spot additions of calcium or phosphorus (but not nitrogen), suggesting deficiencies of those elements, while roots in a forest on a spodosol responded to added nitrogen. Indirect evidence from element ratios suggests that nitrogen generally is not limiting in lowland tropical forests - carbon:nitrogen ratios are low, and nitrogen:phosphorus (or calcium, magnesium, or potassium) ratios are very high by global standards in forests on the oxisols and ultisols that make up the majority of tropical forest soils (Vitousek 1984; Vitousek & Sanford 1986; Jordan 1985). Nitrogen-fixing legumes are often important components of the plant community in such sites. In contrast, tropical montane forests and forests developed on sandy soils (spodosols and psamments) generally have higher carbon:nitrogen ratios and could be limited by nitrogen (Cuevas & Medina 1986, 1988; Vitousek & Sanford 1986; Vitousek et al. 1988). Two fertilization studies in the montane tropics have identified</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">92 nitrogen (or nitrogen and phosphorus) as limiting to primary production (Vitousek et al. 1987; Tanner et al. 1989).</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> NPP in most lakes in the temperate zone is clearly limited by phosphorus,</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> Net ecosystem production in many tropical lagoons and embayments appears to be phosphorus limited (Smith 1984) as does photosynthesis and growth of tropical seagrasses and macroalgae in many (Short et al. 1985, 1990; Littler et al. 1988; Powell et al. 1989) but not all (La Pointe et al. 1987; McGlathery et al. in press) locations.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">ltimately, this nitrogen limitation can persist only if biological nitrogen fixation does not respond to nitrogen deficiency with an increase sufficient to reverse that deficiency in nitrogen-limited sites.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">We will review these differences briefly by contrasting the biogeochemical cycles of nitrogen and phosphorus,</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">First, in terrestrial ecosystems nitrogen and phosphorus differ in their ultimate source, with nitrogen derived primarily from the atmosphere and phosphorus from rock weathering. Accordingly, nitrogen is nearly absent from new soils and would be expected to be limiting to both NPP and NEP there - as indeed it generally is</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> It does not explain why NPP and perhaps NEP in many temperate and boreal areas is nitrogen limited; 12,000 to 20,000 years of post-glacial time should be sufficient to accumulate enough nitrogen from precipitation and nitrogen fixation to alleviate the nitrogen limitation that occurs in new soils (</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Second, nitrogen and phosphorus differ in their mobility through soils, with nitrogen being much more readily lost to terrestrial ecosystems through leaching to aquatic systems or volatilization and denitrification to the atmosphere.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">Could the greater mobility of nitrogen cause a tendency towards nitrogen limitation in terrestrial ecosystems?</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen retention within ecosystems is dominated by biological processes (plant uptake and microbial immobilization) (Vitousek & Matson 1985). When these are disrupted by intense or prolonged disturbance such as cultivation, the initial response is nitrogen mobilization leading to a large increase in nitrogen availability that can support a burst of “pioneer” agriculture. With continued cultivation, however, a large proportion of total soil nitrogen eventually is lost to harvest, erosion, leaching to streamwater and groundwater, and volatilization and denitrification. The residual nitrogen is in organic forms that are highly recalcitrant to decomposition.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">In contrast, phosphorus is retained within terrestrial ecosystems by both biological and geochemical mechanisms (notably adsorption and precipitation with iron, aluminum, manganese, and calcium) (Wood et al. 1984); hence phosphorus losses primarily occur through harvest and erosion even under prolonged cultivation.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Moreover, the relatively labile forms of organic nitrogen are depleted disproportionately in comparison with phosphorus (</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">However, fire is one form of both natural and human-caused disturbance that unquestionably causes disproportionately high losses of nitrogen. Fire volatilizes nitrogen as it releases most other nutrients into available forms</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">At the same time, fire also reduces competition for light and releases phosphorus into readily available forms; it could therefore enhance nitrogen fixation</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">There is substantial evidence for elevated nitrogen fixation following fire (Eisele et al. 1989) but high frequencies of fire (often as a consequence of human activity) clearly cause nitrogen losses in excess of any replacement by nitrogen fixation (Ojima 1987). Moreover, although fire volatilizes substantial quantities of nitrogen, it also increases the shortterm availability of residual soil nitrogen. Consequently, a short-lived flush of available nitrogen can partially repress nitrogen fixation during the brief period in which light and phosphorus are elevated after fire</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Overall, fire is probably a significant cause of nitrogen limitation in terrestrial systemsin which it is frequent.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">Are nitrogen losses from undisturbed terrestrial ecosystems sufficient to lead to nitrogen limitation ?</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">The major exceptions are observed where nitrogen availability within intact systems is high, as in old, non-aggrading forests on fertile soils and in the lowland tropics</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Losses of the more easily measured gas N,O (a product of nitrification and denitrification) are much greater from lowland tropical forest ecosystems than elsewhere</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">the greater mobility of nitrogen than phosphorus tends to drive terrestrial ecosystems towards nitrogen limitation.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Phosphorus adsorption could also affect the degree of phosphorus versus nitrogen limitation in some terrestrial ecosystems</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Phosphate adsorption is particularly marked in the variable-charge iron and aluminum sesquioxide clay-dominated soils of tropical regions (Uehara & Gillman 1981); such clays are amphoteric, with net positive charge under acidic conditions, and they bind phosphate nearly irreversibly</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Many tropical agricultural systems require fertilization with very large quantities of phosphorus to overcome this phosphorus fixing capacity</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Accordingly, the observed pattern of very high C:P and N:P ratios in the vegetation of many tropical forests (putative phosphorus limitation) could be due in part to phosphorus adsorption. Adsorption of nitrate-nitrogen also occurs on such soils (Kinjo & Pratt 1971; Matson et al. 1987), but it is neither as complete nor as irreversible as phosphorus adsorption.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">biochemical differences between nitrogen and phosphorus could be significant on the ecosystem level.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">rganic</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">98 nitrogen is directly carbon-bonded (C-N) and often in structural or complexed forms, while organic phosphorus is usually ester-bonded (C-O-P) and often soluble.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">This distinction</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">is appealing, although the experimental evidence supporting it is wea</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">In terrestrial ecosystems, this difference between the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles also means that nitrogen limitation can set in motion a positive feedback that maintains or accentuates nitrogen limitation</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">positive feedback that maintains or accentuates nitrogen limitation</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen-deficient plants produce tissue and litter that has higher carbon:nitrogen ratios and relatively higher contents of lignin and other recalcitrant compounds than plants with sufficient nitrogen</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Their tissue therefore decomposes relatively slowly, and the microorganisms decomposing it immobilize large quantities of nitrogen for long periods of time</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">This immobilization in turn reduces nitrogen availability to plants, and the cycle continues towards greater nitrogen limitation as long as organic nitrogen continues to accumulate. Some of these mechanisms apply equally well to phosphorus (i.e. phosphorus limitation leads to high carbon:phosphorus ratios in litter), but to the extent that organic phosphorus can be mineralized on demand (McGill & Cole 1981) the complete feedback cycle will not operate.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">to the extent that organic phosphorus can be mineralized on demand (McGill & Cole 1981) the complete feedback cycle will not operate.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">a number of additional mechanisms that favor nitrogen over phosphorus limitation have been suggested.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">In terrestrial ecosystems, reabsorption of phosphorus from senescing foliage may be more effective on average than is reabsorption of nitrogen (Walbridge in press), and there is some evidence that the fraction of foliar phosphorus reabsorbed is more dependent on phosphorus nutrition than is the case for nitrogen</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">We believe that three mechanisms or classes of mechanisms can prevent nitrogen fixation from responding to and reversing nitrogen limitation. These include: 1. Nitrogen fixation rates are low because of energetic constraints on the activity of nitrogen-fixing organisms. 2. Rates of nitrogen fixation are themselves limited by some other nutrient; that is, ecosystem-level nitrogen limitation can be viewed as limitation by some other element in disguise. 3. Nitrogen-fixing organisms cannot become established or are unable to fix nitrogen at significant rates due to other ecological or physical constraints.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Nitrogen could limit primary production because the energetic cost of fixing dinitrogen can be high relative to that of taking up ammonium or nitrate.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Gutschick (1981) calculated that it costs a symbiotic nitrogen fixer 8-12 g of glucose to acquire 1 g of nitrogen via fixation - not including the construction or maintenance costs of any specialized structure</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> Moreover, the costs of nitrate reduction may be more apparent than real if reduction can be coupled to photosynthetic electron transport.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Finally, ammonium acquisition is energetically inexpensive - discounting any increased investment in roots or symbionts that might be required to overcome the low mobility of ammonium in most soils.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Gutschick (1981, 1987) suggested that in terrestrial ecosystems, symbiotic nitrogen fixers are often present in early successional sites but are absent from climax sites - even though nitrogen remains limiting (indeed, may become limiting) to net primary production in the older sites</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> This mechanism could be reinforced by the difficulty that nitrogen fixers experience in colonizing and growing up through the understory of closed-canopy community</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> That successional pattern of colonization is often observed in the temperate zone (Boring et al. 1988) although not in the many tropical forests in which legumes are important components of the community at all stages of succession.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">An entirely different mechanism can reduce nitrogen fixation in many early secondary successional sites. The activity of symbiotic nitrogen fixers is repressed by high levels of available nitrogen, and disturbance generally causes a substantial but short-lived flush of available nitrogen (Bormann & Likens 1979; Vitousek & Matson 1985; Vitousek et al. 1989). Consequently, nitrogen fixation can be suppressed because nitrogen does not limit net primary production at the only time in secondary succession when colonization by nitrogen fixers would be energetically feasible.</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> The activity of soil microorganisms generally is believed to be limited by the supply of labile organic carbon rather than by nitrogen or other nutrients</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> The decomposition of wood, which has very low nitrogen concentrations, may be an exception; heterotrophic nitrogen fixation often is observed in decaying wood (</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen fixation diminishes short of the limit set by phosphorus availability because both terrestrial and aquatic nitrogen fixers systematically have a greater demand for phosphorus than do non-fixers</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Consequently, nitrogen fixation decreases substantially at a phosphorus level where most primary producers can still obtain phosphorus - and at equilibrium, nitrogen fixers are limited by phosphorus while most primary producers are nitrogen limited.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">There is some evidence that molybdenum and other micronutrient additions can regulate nitrogen fixation in pasture ecosystems (Gadgil et al. 1981; Dixon & Wheeler 1983) and suggestions that molybdenum additions stimulate rates of nitrogen fixation in some forest soils (Silvester 1989). The low pH of many forest soils may cause strong adsorption of molybdenum, thereby keeping its availability low</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">We speculate that the pattern of nitrogen limitation on land (widespread except in lowland tropical forests and perhaps very old temperate soils) probably reflects energetic constraints on the colonization of nitrogen fixers in communities with closed canopies, the influence of fire and other disturbances that mobilize nitrogen more rapidly than other elements, and positive feedbacks between low nitrogen availability, low litter quality, and low rates of decomposition. Rapid rates of decomposi-</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">106 tion in lowland tropical forests and the prevalence of canopy legumes reduce the likelihood of nitrogen limitation there, and the widespread occurence of very old soils in the tropics (due in part to the absence of glaciation) increases the probability of limitation by phosphorus or other rock-derived nutrients.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">we briefly review evidence for nitrogen limitation in a range of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. We then examine a number of mechanisms that could explain the persistence of apparent or real nitrogen limitation in the face of the rather persuasive logic that it should be ephemeral or rare.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Howarth (1988) identified three processes as being potentially nutrient limited: - the growth of populations currently present, - - net primary production (NPP, defined as gross production or photosynthesis minus respiration of the producers), and net ecosystem production (NEP, defined as NPP minus heterotrophic respiration).</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">We are concerned with why it may take millions of years for phosphorus limitation to be expressed - and with why nitrogen often appears to limit production in soils that are “only” tens to hundreds of thousands of years old.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen is often considered to be the element most often limiting to net primary production in terrestrial ecosystems</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> Limitation by phosphorus and other elements also occurs, sometimes jointly with nitrogen limitation and sometimes on relatively unusual soils (ie deep glacial outwash, organic soils). In water-limited systems such as short-grass steppe and desert, water often represents the primary limit to production, but nitrogen is often the nutrient that becomes limiting when water supply is enhanced</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Production in many tropical savamrahs and grasslands is demonstrably nitrogen-limited (van Breman & de Wit 1983; Hogberg 1989) but there is relatively little direct evidence bearing on nutrient limitation in natural tropical forests. Cuevas & Medina (1988) did demostrate that tree roots in a lowland tropical forest on an oxisol proliferated vigorously in response to spot additions of calcium or phosphorus (but not nitrogen), suggesting deficiencies of those elements, while roots in a forest on a spodosol responded to added nitrogen. Indirect evidence from element ratios suggests that nitrogen generally is not limiting in lowland tropical forests - carbon:nitrogen ratios are low, and nitrogen:phosphorus (or calcium, magnesium, or potassium) ratios are very high by global standards in forests on the oxisols and ultisols that make up the majority of tropical forest soils (Vitousek 1984; Vitousek & Sanford 1986; Jordan 1985). Nitrogen-fixing legumes are often important components of the plant community in such sites. In contrast, tropical montane forests and forests developed on sandy soils (spodosols and psamments) generally have higher carbon:nitrogen ratios and could be limited by nitrogen (Cuevas & Medina 1986, 1988; Vitousek & Sanford 1986; Vitousek et al. 1988). Two fertilization studies in the montane tropics have identified</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">92 nitrogen (or nitrogen and phosphorus) as limiting to primary production (Vitousek et al. 1987; Tanner et al. 1989).</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> NPP in most lakes in the temperate zone is clearly limited by phosphorus,</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> Net ecosystem production in many tropical lagoons and embayments appears to be phosphorus limited (Smith 1984) as does photosynthesis and growth of tropical seagrasses and macroalgae in many (Short et al. 1985, 1990; Littler et al. 1988; Powell et al. 1989) but not all (La Pointe et al. 1987; McGlathery et al. in press) locations.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Ultimately, this nitrogen limitation can persist only if biological nitrogen fixation does not respond to nitrogen deficiency with an increase sufficient to reverse that deficiency in nitrogen-limited sites.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">We will review these differences briefly by contrasting the biogeochemical cycles of nitrogen and phosphorus,</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">First, in terrestrial ecosystems nitrogen and phosphorus differ in their ultimate source, with nitrogen derived primarily from the atmosphere and phosphorus from rock weathering. Accordingly, nitrogen is nearly absent from new soils and would be expected to be limiting to both NPP and NEP there - as indeed it generally is</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> It does not explain why NPP and perhaps NEP in many temperate and boreal areas is nitrogen limited; 12,000 to 20,000 years of post-glacial time should be sufficient to accumulate enough nitrogen from precipitation and nitrogen fixation to alleviate the nitrogen limitation that occurs in new soils (</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Second, nitrogen and phosphorus differ in their mobility through soils, with nitrogen being much more readily lost to terrestrial ecosystems through leaching to aquatic systems or volatilization and denitrification to the atmosphere.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">Could the greater mobility of nitrogen cause a tendency towards nitrogen limitation in terrestrial ecosystems?</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen retention within ecosystems is dominated by biological processes (plant uptake and microbial immobilization) (Vitousek & Matson 1985). When these are disrupted by intense or prolonged disturbance such as cultivation, the initial response is nitrogen mobilization leading to a large increase in nitrogen availability that can support a burst of “pioneer” agriculture. With continued cultivation, however, a large proportion of total soil nitrogen eventually is lost to harvest, erosion, leaching to streamwater and groundwater, and volatilization and denitrification. The residual nitrogen is in organic forms that are highly recalcitrant to decomposition.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">In contrast, phosphorus is retained within terrestrial ecosystems by both biological and geochemical mechanisms (notably adsorption and precipitation with iron, aluminum, manganese, and calcium) (Wood et al. 1984); hence phosphorus losses primarily occur through harvest and erosion even under prolonged cultivation.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Moreover, the relatively labile forms of organic nitrogen are depleted disproportionately in comparison with phosphorus (</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">However, fire is one form of both natural and human-caused disturbance that unquestionably causes disproportionately high losses of nitrogen. Fire volatilizes nitrogen as it releases most other nutrients into available forms</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">At the same time, fire also reduces competition for light and releases phosphorus into readily available forms; it could therefore enhance nitrogen fixation</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">There is substantial evidence for elevated nitrogen fixation following fire (Eisele et al. 1989) but high frequencies of fire (often as a consequence of human activity) clearly cause nitrogen losses in excess of any replacement by nitrogen fixation (Ojima 1987). Moreover, although fire volatilizes substantial quantities of nitrogen, it also increases the shortterm availability of residual soil nitrogen. Consequently, a short-lived flush of available nitrogen can partially repress nitrogen fixation during the brief period in which light and phosphorus are elevated after fire</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Overall, fire is probably a significant cause of nitrogen limitation in terrestrial systems in which it is frequent.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">Are nitrogen losses from undisturbed terrestrial ecosystems sufficient to lead to nitrogen limitation ?</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">The major exceptions are observed where nitrogen availability within intact systems is high, as in old, non-aggrading forests on fertile soils and in the lowland tropics</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Losses of the more easily measured gas N,O (a product of nitrification and denitrification) are much greater from lowland tropical forest ecosystems than elsewhere</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">the greater mobility of nitrogen than phosphorus tends to drive terrestrial ecosystems towards nitrogen limitation.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Phosphorus adsorption could also affect the degree of phosphorus versus nitrogen limitation in some terrestrial ecosystems</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Phosphate adsorption is particularly marked in the variable-charge iron and aluminum sesquioxide clay-dominated soils of tropical regions (Uehara & Gillman 1981); such clays are amphoteric, with net positive charge under acidic conditions, and they bind phosphate nearly irreversibly</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Many tropical agricultural systems require fertilization with very large quantities of phosphorus to overcome this phosphorus fixing capacity</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Accordingly, the observed pattern of very high C:P and N:P ratios in the vegetation of many tropical forests (putative phosphorus limitation) could be due in part to phosphorus adsorption. Adsorption of nitrate-nitrogen also occurs on such soils (Kinjo & Pratt 1971; Matson et al. 1987), but it is neither as complete nor as irreversible as phosphorus adsorption.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">biochemical differences between nitrogen and phosphorus could be significant on the ecosystem level.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">organic</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">98 nitrogen is directly carbon-bonded (C-N) and often in structural or complexed forms, while organic phosphorus is usually ester-bonded (C-O-P) and often soluble.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">This distinction</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">is appealing, although the experimental evidence supporting it is wea</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">In terrestrial ecosystems, this difference between the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles also means that nitrogen limitation can set in motion a positive feedback that maintains or accentuates nitrogen limitation</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">positive feedback that maintains or accentuates nitrogen limitation</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen-deficient plants produce tissue and litter that has higher carbon:nitrogen ratios and relatively higher contents of lignin and other recalcitrant compounds than plants with sufficient nitrogen</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Their tissue therefore decomposes relatively slowly, and the microorganisms decomposing it immobilize large quantities of nitrogen for long periods of time</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">This immobilization in turn reduces nitrogen availability to plants, and the cycle continues towards greater nitrogen limitation as long as organic nitrogen continues to accumulate. Some of these mechanisms apply equally well to phosphorus (i.e. phosphorus limitation leads to high carbon:phosphorus ratios in litter), but to the extent that organic phosphorus can be mineralized on demand (McGill & Cole 1981) the complete feedback cycle will not operate.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">to the extent that organic phosphorus can be mineralized on demand (McGill & Cole 1981) the complete feedback cycle will not operate.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #90EE90">a number of additional mechanisms that favor nitrogen over phosphorus limitation have been suggested.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">In terrestrial ecosystems, reabsorption of phosphorus from senescing foliage may be more effective on average than is reabsorption of nitrogen (Walbridge in press), and there is some evidence that the fraction of foliar phosphorus reabsorbed is more dependent on phosphorus nutrition than is the case for nitrogen</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">We believe that three mechanisms or classes of mechanisms can prevent nitrogen fixation from responding to and reversing nitrogen limitation. These include: 1. Nitrogen fixation rates are low because of energetic constraints on the activity of nitrogen-fixing organisms. 2. Rates of nitrogen fixation are themselves limited by some other nutrient; that is, ecosystem-level nitrogen limitation can be viewed as limitation by some other element in disguise. 3. Nitrogen-fixing organisms cannot become established or are unable to fix nitrogen at significant rates due to other ecological or physical constraints.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Nitrogen could limit primary production because the energetic cost of fixing dinitrogen can be high relative to that of taking up ammonium or nitrate.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Gutschick (1981) calculated that it costs a symbiotic nitrogen fixer 8-12 g of glucose to acquire 1 g of nitrogen via fixation - not including the construction or maintenance costs of any specialized structure</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> Moreover, the costs of nitrate reduction may be more apparent than real if reduction can be coupled to photosynthetic electron transport.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">Finally, ammonium acquisition is energetically inexpensive - discounting any increased investment in roots or symbionts that might be required to overcome the low mobility of ammonium in most soils.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Gutschick (1981, 1987) suggested that in terrestrial ecosystems, symbiotic nitrogen fixers are often present in early successional sites but are absent from climax sites - even though nitrogen remains limiting (indeed, may become limiting) to net primary production in the older sites</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> This mechanism could be reinforced by the difficulty that nitrogen fixers experience in colonizing and growing up through the understory of closed-canopy community</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> That successional pattern of colonization is often observed in the temperate zone (Boring et al. 1988) although not in the many tropical forests in which legumes are important components of the community at all stages of succession.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">An entirely different mechanism can reduce nitrogen fixation in many early secondary successional sites. The activity of symbiotic nitrogen fixers is repressed by high levels of available nitrogen, and disturbance generally causes a substantial but short-lived flush of available nitrogen (Bormann & Likens 1979; Vitousek & Matson 1985; Vitousek et al. 1989). Consequently, nitrogen fixation can be suppressed because nitrogen does not limit net primary production at the only time in secondary succession when colonization by nitrogen fixers would be energetically feasible.</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> The activity of soil microorganisms generally is believed to be limited by the supply of labile organic carbon rather than by nitrogen or other nutrients</span>  </p> <p> <span style="color: #ADD8E6"> The decomposition of wood, which has very low nitrogen concentrations, may be an exception; heterotrophic nitrogen fixation often is observed in decaying wood (</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Nitrogen fixation diminishes short of the limit set by phosphorus availability because both terrestrial and aquatic nitrogen fixers systematically have a greater demand for phosphorus than do non-fixers</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">Consequently, nitrogen fixation decreases substantially at a phosphorus level where most primary producers can still obtain phosphorus - and at equilibrium, nitrogen fixers are limited by phosphorus while most primary producers are nitrogen limited.</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #F9E076">There is some evidence that molybdenum and other micronutrient additions can regulate nitrogen fixation in pasture ecosystems (Gadgil et al. 1981; Dixon & Wheeler 1983) and suggestions that molybdenum additions stimulate rates of nitrogen fixation in some forest soils (Silvester 1989). The low pH of many forest soils may cause strong adsorption of molybdenum, thereby keeping its availability low</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">We speculate that the pattern of nitrogen limitation on land (widespread except in lowland tropical forests and perhaps very old temperate soils) probably reflects energetic constraints on the colonization of nitrogen fixers in communities with closed canopies, the influence of fire and other disturbances that mobilize nitrogen more rapidly than other elements, and positive feedbacks between low nitrogen availability, low litter quality, and low rates of decomposition. Rapid rates of decomposi-</span>  </p> <p>  <span style="color: #DE1738">106 tion in lowland tropical forests and the prevalence of canopy legumes reduce the likelihood of nitrogen limitation there, and the widespread occurence of very old soils in the tropics (due in part to the absence of glaciation) increases the probability of limitation by phosphorus or other rock-derived nutrients.</span>  </p> 

%% Import Date: 2023-09-29T10:14:21.205-04:00 %%
